Hey what's up everyone and welcome back to another video. In this video we're
gonna see how we can build dashboards using Python and Quarto so that you can
put together dashboards like the one you see on the screen with different types
of components, different types of graphs, even different pages that have tables
and some interactivity in them. We'll start with the basics and kind of work
our way up to this. There's no prereqs to watch this video but it might be helpful
to check out the recent Quarto crash course we posted which I'll link in the
description and if you work more in the R space I might also recommend checking
out Mine's recent tutorials on Quarto dashboards which are also linked in the
description. To get started there's a github repo that has some data in it so
it specifically has some Airbnb data both on all-time listings ratings and
some specific reviews that the Airbnbs were given. This data came from a site
called insideairbnb.com and basically downloaded some data from the Boston
area there. I augmented it very slightly but I feel like it's a good data source
to use to kind of build a real world-esque dashboard with Quarto and
Python. All of that's linked in the description. In addition the finished
dashboard file that we'll have complete after this video will be found there and
you can also see what libraries are needed via this requirements.txt but
we'll start from scratch so I'm going to just delete all this stuff and the first
thing we'll want to do is create a QMD file so I'll call this dashboard.qmd
and when you're building a dashboard in Quarto we always want to start with
specifying our parameters and specifically we'll specify the format
dashboard and if some of this is not seeming familiar again there's a Quarto
crash course linked in the description recommend checking that out but you
don't need to watch that to see this video and we can go ahead and just
render a basic dashboard so maybe I give this a title to rental dashboard and I
can just add some random headers here how about that so we'll see we have a
very basic dashboard given this gives us the title over here in the top left I
can just name this something like overview and I can start filling in
contents of our dashboard here that makes sense so the first thing is
probably worth knowing about with Quarto dashboards is the concept of adding
rows and adding cells within the row so we can add two rows here and basically
we can add different Python blocks so I'm going to add Python code like this
this is kind of standard Quarto stuff and you know maybe I'll just print
hello world here and I'll copy this and paste it a few times just so you can
kind of see how things are laid out and maybe I paste it twice in this second
one so we have our overview page and we have two rows so this is a first row
with four hello worlds and a second row with two hello worlds and I run this we
see we get a layout like this we can do some other stuff to this so imagine I
wanted the height of this to be only like 10% I wanted to be much tighter and
I wanted the rest of this stuff to fill in much more space I can start
specifying different details of my rows like this so now our hello worlds up the
top are much smaller and there's other ways we can modify this even further
other things worthwhile knowing about right at the start here is you can add
like titles to your cards by doing the pound pipe syntax and doing something
like title if you do that you'll see different parameters that you have
access to so you know maybe if you wanted output to be false and not to
show up that code you could do things like that there's different options we
have here but if I just add title rental overview we'll see that it gives it a
little label like that might not be the clearest for that cell specifically but
I can go down here let's say add it to this one and rerun this and we see the
card pops up like this so we can start titling the different charts that we
have in our dashboard using this obviously though a bunch of hello worlds
isn't the most useful thing so I recommend knowing what you have access
to so we have access to like showing all sorts of different plots in Python
so I could use plotly here I could use matplotlib I could use Altair etc a
bunch of different graphing libraries all could be embedded here I also have
access to some quarto specific dashboard elements so one that I specifically like
are these cards called value boxes so I'm going to remove this height real
quick and maybe I might just call this like like high-level stats this won't
show up in my dashboard anywhere but it's probably good to give a descriptive
name so you know what type of code elements you want to include in that row
and I guess another thing worth mentioning is in addition to running our
code like this we can also add this parameter orientation and make that I
think rose let's see if this works and it basically just styles things oh wait
let's try it one more time columns basically just formats things instead of
this defining a row this now defines a column so everything within it is you
know a row within that column so it's just reversing things but I'll remove
that for now it's good to know about though and then if you wanted to specify
a height or I guess a width of your row you would just similarly do width equals
30% when you have that orientation equals or orientation columns specified
so we'll see that these will shrink just like that so some good basic stuff to
know about but let's get into some more interesting things so I mentioned these
value boxes so let's add some value boxes and actually load in our data and
just start doing some meaningful stuff if you ever forget about what value boxes
are or how to use them I recommend just looking up value boxes quarto go to the
docs and you'll find all sorts of useful stuff somewhere on this page I'm sure
we'll find the value boxes and sure enough here we are I'm going to just
copy an example value box maybe I'll do one that's a little bit more
sophisticated so I'll do something like this and I will paste in this cell and
we don't have anything called comments right now so I'll just give this a
random number okay so comments per day 45 and it's taking this primary color
there's some built-in options here we could do something like secondary to run
that it's going to take a secondary color based on a theme that we can
specify in our yaml at the top so if I did dark theme or let me think I think
there's a theme called like Cosmo we'll probably see a different secondary color
pop up and we'll see a different style so looking into themes is another cool
option here I'll just use the built-in theme but the secondary color here does
depend it on the theme you use you can also though pass in just like random
hex colors or I think some English named colors work but if I pass in a
random hex color you know we get a bubble that looks like this all good
stuff to know about these icons are interesting these come from the bootstrap
icons so if we look at bootstrap icons I'll link this in the description
anything we see here and anything we search up so imagine I'm doing a
dashboard on Airbnb listen so maybe I want a house if we copy the name house
then we'll see that icon pop up it's all built in nicely to quarto so I'm going
to paste in house and we'll see this icon change cool and maybe I wanted to
change the title title will be like number of listings that we have in our
Airbnb of Airbnbs that we have okay that looks good maybe we did want this height
to just feel like I don't know 25% of our space and I'm going to paste in a
couple more value boxes so I'll do one more one more so now we have three value
boxes and how about we have one value box that's the number of listings one
value box is number of reviews and then ones are maybe our average review rate
and make sense to have different values for each of these so number of reviews
what might be a good icon maybe some sort of like piece of paper or something
I don't know what would happen if I look up count maybe yeah person I kind of
like that number of reviews use the person one icon is just called person
lowercase person and then maybe this last one is going to be average review
rating so maybe it's like a star I think that makes sense
zero star star or star fill I might use star fill star and now if we rerun this
we get something that looks like this and maybe I don't actually like star
fill because it's I thought I would just be white but it is filling in based on
the theme I think so I'm going to just leave it open cool and I might just
leave these colors as the secondary colors of the theme that we're using
all right now let's actually fill in the real values here for these parts of our
dashboard so let's load in some code I often do this either you know maybe even
above where I start my pages to kind of know this is like the setup code I'm
trying to go ahead and do Python here at the top and if we look at where our
files are we have files called listings CSV and reviews dot CSV let's go ahead
and look at these so listings dot CSV one cool thing within VS code is you
have the ability to preview CSVs and this might be very small and hard for
people to see try to zoom in a bit but has all sorts of information on
different Airbnb listings again this is you know pretty much real data it's
coming from this inside Airbnb site and this is for the Boston area so we have
some Boston Airbnbs here all sorts of information about them and we'll say
that this is like the you know all-time ratings and whatnot so you see there's
like a ratings column in here somewhere in here there's different ratings I
think we're getting there like review score different types of ratings out of
five kind of all-time we'll say they are and we also have this reviews dot CSV
table if I zoom in on this we have specific you know comments that people
have left open up this column a bunch we actually have textual information
about people's stays along with a rating that they gave the place so in like a
real-world context you might have these two different kind of data sources and
you might kind of aggregate them and you know tie them together for your
dashboard right now we're dealing with static data we're not like actually
pulling from an API but we can kind of write our code in such a way where we
could easily replace it with API calls if we needed to so what I might do here
is I might create like a helper file I might call this like data helpers dot
PI and I might create some functions here so I might import pandas as PD I
might do like a def load listings and that would just return PD dot CSV data
slash listings we don't actually have a data folder maybe I should have put it
that way listings not CSV I might have a function called load reviews that just
loads the reviews this way the reason that I'm creating these functions is
imagine that you did want to have some sort of sophisticated logic here you
wanted to be able to specify like you know a start date or something for the
reviews an end date or maybe you wanted some API logic in here you could put
that all in the dashboard QMD file but it sometimes makes sense to you know
keep things clean by isolating it and putting it in its own functions in its
own file so I'm just kind of showing that we can do it but we're gonna keep
ours very simple it's just literally loading our CSV files but I'll make some
sort of comment like showing functions that you could augment to have load data
in yeah oh it had a good autocomplete there something like that and then we
go to our dashboard to QMD we can import our we probably do the same import I
don't know if we're doing this double import from data helpers import load
listings and load reviews we can set our reviews and our listings like this
and that should be good there for getting our data and then if we wanted
to actually populate our data I mean I guess one thing we could do is you can
run cells here and actually see if things are loading properly if I look up
listings in this interactive table we see that we do get stuff I could run
commands like listings dot columns and just get the columns in that I could do
the same thing with like reviews and you know I try to make my text very big
on the screen so you can all see but sometimes it as a result you don't see
much meaningful stuff but we can access both that interactively by running cells
here in our VS code window but we can go ahead and actually populate these with
real values if I do length listings we'll get the number of listings in our
data if I do length reviews we'll get the number of reviews and maybe this
like load reviews was over a six month window you know it's just always
whenever we run this Cordo report it's getting the last six months you could
augment the function to do that and then average review rating this would be a
little bit more complex we actually need to kind of know what columns and stuff
we have in our reviews so let's just do that real quick reviews dot columns we
have date month year let's look at it the head real quick month is a number
that could very easily help us I guess we don't we just really just need to
take an average over the overall for all the reviews we're not doing anything
fancy right now so for this last value we could pass in some code here we
already have it as a Python cell so let's think how we would do this yeah
make it an f-string reviews overall was the column and I think we can just take
the mean and I do like this syntax with f-strings showing show two decibel two
decimal places as a float close this off and let's rerun our dashboard cool
and now we actually have some real data here in our dashboard on you know some
info on our listings and reviews now let's maybe add some useful graphs to
our data so what we might want to know about is how have our listings been
trending over time so maybe we add a row our next row is like plots and let's
think what we might want to do here we might want to aggregate by month so we
have our reviews and we have that month column we just saw so if we wanted to
plot the data the average review by like month or something like that let's think
how we could do that we could probably do a matplotlib plot pretty easily we
could do maybe we import you know I kind of like loading in all my libraries
at the top you could either do that at the top or you know do it in the cell
that you need the code I think we just need these libraries for now if we plot
we'll start out by doing a plot that is ratings by month that's going to be
equal to reviews dot group by date I want to group by month specifically I
guess the other way that they're doing it would work and then I want to take
the mean but I only want the overall column and then I want to probably reset
my index let's print ratings by month dot head reviews is not defined okay
kind of run this cell first this looks pretty good is that all of the months
that we have is there any more months I was just the head so I guess if I
printed the whole thing we should see that six month cool you see this it
looks good so now we just need to plot this and we could plot it by doing the
following I could do PLT dot plot ratings by month month ratings by month
overall this should do it rerun it look at that and you know you're going to
want to customize it and style it a bit more so maybe you add a title like
average rating past six months so we have a little title now for our our
graph but I do wrong I think it's always a good idea to like add a thicker line I
think just when you're dealing with this everything should probably be a bit
bigger so and maybe we don't want instead of using numbers here we want to
actually plot the month names I use github copilot in my vs code and I often
will do something like make my matplotlib plot line thicker make the
axis labels larger that's a good start see if it generates me good code I like
this overall let's try this
what am I maybe even a little thicker try for here yeah it's a little bit
easier to read I want the actual tick marks bigger so make plot tick marks
bigger oh look at that let's see how this does okay it's showing all sorts of
weird stuff now if you do a colon after your plot dot show it won't show these
intermediate steps little quirk to know about did that do anything here let me
make this like much bigger okay that's definitely making things bigger so you
can kind of play around with this as you see fit that's a decent average rating
chart and you know really as a someone that's running Airbnbs what I would want
to know is like okay in the past six months are we trending upwards are we
trending downwards that's gonna start helping me understand overall trends so
maybe we're implementing a bunch of solutions to help improve our work you
know based on this trend line I kind of have a sense of okay are the changes
we're making actually working or not cool and then maybe we wanted to replace
the month with the actual month name I think we can use the calendar library to
do that I'm curious I could also replace numerical months one two three
four five six with their correct month abbreviation Jan Feb March April June
April shoot I forgot about May June let's see if this code works
yeah I mean this is gonna work just doing a quick replace yeah that did fix
things well copilot is pretty crazy so I guess just if you're curious if you
go in your VS code and go to extensions look up copilot that's what I'm using I
think it's a paid product you can also check out something called codium as
like a free way to do this in your VS code editor just helpful thing to know
about all right so that's a ratings by month plot maybe we also wanted to add a
plot that's just a histogram of the counts of each different type of rating
so rating counts I'll call this that's going to be equal to reviews overall
that value counts that sort index that looks right we can print that out real
quick just to check run this and this looks good this looks right if we have a
four point six four overall you'd expect most of them to be five stars and much
less to be one and two and three stars so if we plot dot you can either do a
bar chart or you could probably do a histogram via matplotlib cool and I
think one thing that I would recommend is passing in a color that's similar to
our secondary color so like what I might do open up a web browser real quick so
if you touch this button you open up a web browser if we look at what the
dashboard looks like in the web I could use I use this little inspector tool I
can inspect this color have it and then I could you know make my line colors so
I think somewhere in the plot I think I can pass in a color and now if we look
at our line
we see that's that same gray color similarly could pass in the color here
get this to have that same curry I just like having uniformity in the colors
that is in a dashboard that I'm working on you could also like as a better
practice you might want to define your color at the top if there's a color you
know you're going to be using and then just pass in that color in those
different spots that takes in a color
cool all right let's maybe also add another row and we'll make an actual map
of our listings the best way to do this I find is using this folium library so
I'm going to import folium here up at the top and I usually forget how to do a
folium plot without looking it up so I might just look up folium map Python
or like let's say we have Latin longitudes because we do for our listing
so folium lat and longitude Python example and I mean there's a bunch of
different examples that you I'm sure you can find this looks like one too I'll
just copy this little code snippet
and paste it in here and our map center so let's look at our listings again we
have columns called latitude and longitude here so we want to grab those
so we have our listings they're going to be we want to grab the latitude and
longitude the map center then is going to be listings dot latitude dot mean
same thing for our longitude so we could either grab the column this way or you
could use the bracket syntax I think that's a column is it a uppercase
yep uppercase uppercase okay this is Boston and then we want to iterate
basically over our listings and add markers like this so I could do is for
index row and listings dot error rows look at that autocompletes it pretty
well and let's see what our output looks like if we run this
saying it doesn't know about a latitude that's weird I don't know if it's like
auto capitalizing it it auto capitalizes it in the preview for whatever reason
interesting
ok see what this does
ok we're not seeing anything if I expand that we see this weirdness here and I
know there's a solution to that but what we want to do to see our actual map is
just put my map at the bottom here with folium should display ok look at that we
got our map hidden here at the end at the bottom we see all this weirdness you
can fix the weirdness sometimes it shows intermediate outputs in your cells within
your cards in a cordo dashboard if you assign these intermediate steps to a
variable will kind of fix that issue I also can add a height here which is I
think a pixel value because right now if we scroll down we see that this is like
this random height if I specify a height more explicitly it will help kind of
center things so we actually see what we expect to on our screen if I pop this
open pull this in now we have information again I maybe make these
things a little bit bigger these values you know the labels and whatnot but
shows are no different properties one cool thing that we can do is we can add
custom markers here on a graph and we can even actually add information about
each listing when we hover over these markers so I might paste something in
this will make sense in a second I can add some custom HTML to each marker that
we add so I might paste in something like this we add this basically custom
tooltip that has our name the rating of the property and the price per night and
then I can add a tooltip to our marker specified as tooltip and then I can also
specify a icon I believe yeah icon Fulham icon color equals blue icon equals
home let's see what this looks like
thing because we have a tooltip we don't need this pop-up do I screw
something else up though this indentations off I think it should work
now cool instead of having color blue there's only limited colors here in the
Fulham icon we do color gray that looks pretty similar to our other colors I
think there's even a light gray so you could pick one of those colors whatever
you think is better but it kind of blends in with the rest of our details
and you can see information about each of these listings you could zoom in you
know look a little bit more about them all right cool let's add some different
pages to our dashboard that has you know maybe some interactive tables so
I'll add another page I'll call this like listing details and then I'll do
another page called recent reviews I'm going to just kind of do some
placeholders here okay let's look at that
listing details recent reviews we want to add some tables here one library that
I like a lot for showcasing tables in inside of quarto is this I tables
library so I'm going to do import I tables and then what we can do down here
is we can just do something like Python I tables dot show and we can do just
like our listings to start see what this looks like you see we got a table here
it's got a lot of stuff in it so we probably only want to have certain
columns instead of having everything but it is cool we could search then by like
you know just ones in the south and how about just Beacon Hill so there's
different ways you can search these interactive tables but maybe we wanted
to just specify specific columns related to ratings so rating columns
these are the basic columns that we want and now if I do listings how about rating
let's see what this gives us
so now we have a table that looks like this which is pretty good obviously it's
not super helpful though because we have these rating columns but we also would
want like the name of the property or something so I might do like call this
display columns and I might add you know my name here of the property maybe the
neighborhood or something maybe I also add the price as one of my display
columns rerun this and we see we get something that looks like this if I then
open this up in its full window we get something that looks like this and one
thing that's cool is if I had this if I was trying to share this with a team
member to understand help them understand our rentals I would probably
give them you know this table and tell them hey you know maybe look at like the
reviews that I have the least amount of accuracy or you know the least
cleanliness and we can kind of start targeting which homes to fix up based
off of this you know etc so that's one table I found sometimes you can customize
this and tweak this in a way that makes more sense like for example if you
wanted to make sure it wrapped and fit into the space of your screen you can
add some custom CSS to you know allow for this let me see how you might do
that you might do something like in our import I tables we would maybe also want
to do import I tables dot ops shins as something like this let me double check
as opt and then you can do something like opt dot classes and specify some
classes that should affect things I could define a class called wrap text
and then I could basically define that class so I could create a new file
called like style dot CSS the class name wrap text and I could even if you wanted
to see like this work you know make this give it a certain color or
something too and then in my dashboard QMD file and I do style or I think CSS
it will do style dot CSS we run this and we see we get it wrapped basically in a
different way I mean basically we can just affect it just formats it a bit
differently I'm not going to go into huge details here but just kind of know
that you could add this style dot CSS and you can style different elements on
the screen as needed okay that's pretty good if we wanted recent reviews table
we could do something similar we probably have to join our reviews with
the listing so reviews joined might equal this basically and then we would
want to display probably the name of the listing the date and the comments
of our reviews and we could do then instead this reviews joined display
columns and let's see what this table looks like cool I also might actually
recommend adding an overall score and the reason for that is if you're doing
an Airbnb listings review it's sometimes really helpful to sort by lowest rated
comments and you can kind of use these reviews to help you identify specific
things that you want to improve in your dashboard so I like adding the overall
there again let's look at what this looks like in our web tab cool good
search you know if I wanted to just only see things for comfy Beacon Hill
studio number 13 you do it this way we see things dynamically update
so you know if I only wanted the stylish downtown studio yeah I can start typing
it in filter by that cool this all looks good I mean honestly that's a lot of the
basics I think one thing that's worth showing is that we could also put like a
plotly graph in here instead of using matplotlib so to do that a similar
plotly graph would be something like this so we have let's say we wanted to
show this based on the neighborhood of the listing some code here that does all
of this and this will be in the final code that is shared in the github link
oh it's using trying to review use reviews joined here to do this I'm going
to define this up at the top
so we now see some information about different neighborhoods as part of our
dashboard cool cool one thing that you might be wondering about as you start
getting comfortable with building dashboards in quarto versus let's say
shiny is like when do you use one over the other I think that if you're you
know sharing something kind of at static intervals you don't always need the data
to be the most up-to-date it's totally fine to use quarto one thing that I'd
recommend is to do embed resources equals true run this we look at the
files we have access to one of them is going to be this dashboard HTML file one
cool thing about quarto is that like this file this dashboard at HTML you
could share it with you know a team member or something and they have access
to this whole little dashboard just via that HTML file whereas if this was a
shiny app they would you need to run a server or something to have this up and
running so it's like kind of cool you could generate you know a static
dashboard basically and you know do that on you know every month basis and then
as long as someone can open up you know the HTML file in a web browser like this
you can see all this information for the let's say last six months so yeah if it's
a static intervals I think quarto is good if you need it to always be living
and you want additional interactivity so imagine you wanted additional
interactivity where there was like a sidebar and you could toggle on or off
different neighborhoods then it might make sense to go to shiny and we've
posted tutorials on shiny building dashboards in shiny with Python I'll put
a link for that in the description as well check out that series if you want
to really understand some you know more interactive dashboards one cool thing
that you can do though is you can actually specify server shiny and start
combining quarto with shiny so you can do stuff like add a sidebar and I'm
going to just kind of preview this I'm not going to go into the details here
maybe in a future video we'll go into the details but I could do like from
shiny import reactive and UI and then I could do UI dot input checkbox group I
could specify neighborhood this is a cool autocomplete and then I'll make
this a list specify a checkbox group like this
and then basically have like toggle controls and these toggle controls
actually updates the data in here so real quick like I guess preview of that
is that maybe I also wanted all of these active just to be let's see
selected I also want this list I want all of them to be selected to start you
could imagine we have a reactive calc def DF or like filtered reviews
that is like this so this basically takes our reviews joined but filters out
the neighborhoods that are selected or only filters in the neighborhoods that
are selected and then you could imagine down here where we render the table
instead of having this code I might do something like at render table return
filter reviews and I'll show you what this looks like
yeah
you
you go to that I think recent reviews table it's not showing up for whatever
reason
I'm gonna real quick just try to make this put this in the same cell as my
table down below
oops this should be is in input dot neighborhood like this
you paste it in one thing real quick
okay it was getting mad because I had this embed resources but as we can see
here if I pop this open and we look at our dashboard now if I untoggle these we
ultimately get no data so there's cool interactivity you can add by combining
shiny with corto but I'm not going to go into huge details there right now I'm
going to remove that shiny code quick
I'm going to put this back to basically what we had before and then a final step
I would recommend is if you wanted to host this somewhere like so I shared
that you can you know do the embed resources and then just share the
dashboard HTML file with someone but if you wanted actual web URL that you could
go to you could add this code to a github repo commit it added a corto
dashboard and then push it and if you use a platform like posit connect cloud
and if the repo that you're working off of is public so I'm going to go to posit
connect cloud I could publish a new corto project corto projects master and
then dashboard dot QMD I can go ahead and publish this it looks like it's mad
at me because I didn't commit that file called data helpers
corto find the repo as long as it's public and you specify the dashboard QMD
file you can publish it and we see we get our dashboard I can make this full
screen I can look at the different tables and look at recent reviews and I
can even go ahead and I can share the URL with a teammate this way as well
all right that's all we're going to cover about Python dashboards in this
video hopefully you found it useful if you enjoyed this video make sure to
throw it a thumbs up subscribe to the channel if you haven't already and I
guess actually as I'm concluding one thing that I should mention is that I
ran into some issues with certain versions of this itables library so
specifically for this tutorial I was using a itables 2.0 as my version so if
you're running into any itables issues maybe check that out all right that's
all we're going to cover in this video if you enjoyed this video throw it a
thumbs up subscribe to the channel if you haven't already more corto and
Python videos coming soon until next time everyone peace out